Do all Marvel comics follow a single continuity? If not, which is the main one and how should I start reading into said continuity?

Marvel comics have "universes," however there are most three big ones to know about: 616, 1610 (Ultimate), and Prime. 616 is the original Marvel universe. 1960s Spider-Man and all that. Pretty much every single Marvel comic leading up to 2000, when the "Ultimate" universe was created to retell the origins of every character from a clean slate, with more modern storytelling. In 2015, the event Secret Wars destroyed 616, 1610, and tons of other universes, smashing their remains up into a kind of Battleworld, and when the dust settled a single universe emerged, now called Prime. Many people however will probably keep calling this 616 since it's basically 616 with a few added characters pulled from Ultimate and other universes.

To couple with the first question, which continuity is the "canon" one? As in the way, the way Darth Vader and Kanan comics are to the Star Wars universe.

Canon in Marvel isn't really the same in Star Wars. In Star Wars, Canon works like a waterfall, flowing down from the movies, then to television, then to books, etc. with each level setting it's own canon as long as it doesn't interfere with the level above it, allowed to override the level below it.

Marvel canon is more parallel, each canon limited to it's own universe, and everything in that universe on pretty equal footing. So something in Thor: The Dark World is as canon as something in The Avengers, and something in Fantastic Four #234 is as canon as something in Ms. Marvel #3. This means sometimes things contradict one another, which Marvel has always been perfectly okay with. Their philosophy is always to focus on telling a good story. If you have to bend the canon a little ways here and there, that's fine, story is what's important. That said, considering the number of comics Marvel has published in total ( at least 32,000 ) the canon is remarkably stable. I'm not a DC expert, but I've heard they have a much, much harder time with this, as DC comics were not originally written into a shared universe, so they had to be joined later on, which required a lot of remodeling.

I want to read the major series, as a foundation.

I was in the same situation as you when I started reading comics. I felt like there was this huge history and I couldn't grasp it and figure out where to start. I ended up reading all 50 years of Amazing Spider-Man, which I wrote about here. This took over a year, and while it was an amazing experience, when I finally got to the end, I realized it's much easier to jump into modern comics than you think. If you just go grab the best-of-the-best of the current series, you will find your bearings, I promise. They know how the comic industry works, and they introduce you to the characters history sometimes better than the original comics did ( depending on the character, not all old comics are classics ).

I actually did end up reading every single major Marvel event, and honestly, a lot of them are really bad. Some are amazing, but some make you wonder how anyone bought them at all. Read the original Secret Wars, no question. Read Thanos Quest and The Infinity Gauntlet. Read Civil War, Secret Invasion, and Avengers vs. X-Men. Those are the events I remember, and the ones after all my reading of modern Marvel, I'm glad I have as a personal reference.
